The Project Gutenberg eBook of Sibling, by Leslie Waltham

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Sibling

Author: Leslie Waltham

Release Date: February 26, 2023 [eBook #70155]

Language: English

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIBLING ***





                                SIBLING

                           By Leslie Waltham

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                 Thrilling Wonder Stories August 1953.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


_Andro, First Liaison Officer of the Third Planet, floated homeward
with his wife's "present" beside him. His boat, pulled by an underwater
sunburst of luminous fish, befitted a man of importance, a man of
prestige and position. He glided past the milk-glass city where the
old ones rocked and crooned before memory pools, where sticky huddles
of children listened to the lyre-flowers, and where the glances of
silver-eyed men and women examined, and met--and held fast. He drifted
to his home on the ledge of a mountain, where he was met by his wife
with her plain, good face. And she looked at the "present," who stood
behind him, and shivered...._

       *       *       *       *       *

Mya, the Earth One, rose as her companion prepared to go. She glanced
at the valley below. Fingers of twilight inquired into its sands for
the first, soft dying of day.

"It's simply too glorious, isn't it?" Her guest's voice clawed at
irritation.

"I suppose so," she shrugged. The sleepy perfumes of the lagoon offered
her its feather boats--curling, amber-crusted reminders of lost autumn
leaves at home. The mountain, ripped from a vortex of sky, was kindling
its transparent crags with an inner glow. Like cracked ice in a cool
glass, she thought, and her fingertips reached for the forgotten chill.

Why did she hate it so? This washed, blue world that had mothered Maun,
and perhaps others made of the same substance?

"Goodness, my dear! How can you look at that marvelous scenery and be
so luke-warmish?"

"I don't know." Her face turned skyward. "It's up there I think. We've
been here six Earth-months and haven't had one glimpse of the sun." The
churning clouds sucked upon themselves in answer.

"And you never will," her comrade chirped. "That's Venus for you. But
you knew that, darling, when you came."

"Only the words. The words, I knew. But the feeling waits for you
outside the words."

The other woman laughed, plucking daintily for her wrap. "You
_are_ in a fret today, Mya."

"Those clouds must go from here to the day after eternity. I sometimes
wonder if the sun is still out there."

"Well really, dear girl! To hear you talk, a person would think this
was a very trying place, instead of a perfectly exquisite planet. In
spite of a ten-day rotation period--"

"That too," sighed Mya. "That too. I remember when I was a little girl
and my nurse made me nap in the daytime. I thought she was always
there, watching me from some place I didn't know about. I feel that way
during the sleep periods here."

Somewhere a wind-clock breathed its warning of the time.

"Gracious!" the guest started. "I didn't realize how long I've been
here."

"Yes."

"And your poor baby! I'd forgotten about Dikki! He must be ravenous."

"I'll feed him right away."

"How is the little angel?"

"Eats like a horse, sleeps like a rock."

"How healthy of him!" She fluttered again over her misplaced wrap.
"Which is more than I can say for you, pet. Has Andro been taking care
of you?"

"Just marvelous care."

"Dear Andro."

Mya would not look at her. "Yes, dear Andro."

"Well, I must be toddling. Now where _did_ I put my stole?"

       *       *       *       *       *

As she spoke, the portal mists billowed and shifted to produce a
striking creature. A perfect, silver replica of Mya. Flowing in cords
of reflected light to her mistress, the creature bowed.

"I do your command, Oh, Earth One."

The breathing at Mya's side caught in amazement. "What in Heaven's
name--?" Her question was chopped short by Mya's hand.

As a mist rising, so the servant delivered the misplaced stole into
astonished hands, and, sprinkling a few drops of dissolving liquid over
the half-eaten wine-fruit, disappeared across the hazy threshold.

"Well! _Who_ was that?"

"That was Maun." Mya's eyes sought a point beyond her companion's head,
a distance she seemed to prefer.

"But--_what_ was that?"

"That was--" She had difficulty in focusing on it. "That was only God
knows what. She was sent to me by the Elders-of-Venus as a mark of
respect for Andro."

"But how did she know I couldn't find...?"

"I told her."

"But you haven't been near the house."

"My mind. I told her with my mind."

Eyebrows lifted ecstatically. "Is she telepathic?"

"I suppose you'd call it that. I think of something--sometimes I do no
more than graze the thought, and like a genie from some dead lamp, Maun
does it."

"The minute you think of it?"

"If I don't specify any particular time. But she has a delaying
mechanism, and I can think it for tomorrow or next week or next year.
It doesn't matter."

"But how cunning!"

"You think so?" It didn't sound like a question.

"Of course, darling."

Suddenly, Mya stood fist high in anger. "Well, it isn't!" she cried.
"What do you think it's like having everything taken away from you?
_You_ try running like a fool every time you think of something
you'd like to do."

"Mya, you shouldn't talk that way!"

"Sorry." Her smile twisted the silence. "But there are some things I'd
like to do for myself. I might even like to take care of my own son."

"How perfectly amazing!" The woman was aghast. "Here you have this lamb
of a servant--"

"Who has me completely trapped. Just thinking of anything sets her off.
I don't have anything left to do."

"Well, counteract the order, my sweet. That's easy enough. Tell her
you've changed your mind."

"I can't! That's just it! She's a positive mechanism and can't be
reversed."

The visitor's face convulsed in concern. "Mya, I said you didn't look
well. You've just been overdoing, that's all, and...."

"I've just been--" Mya had to be rid of this garrulous woman
immediately.

Grasping one fat elbow, she steered expertly. Past the chiding of the
shrubbery. "Just a perfect treasure...." Through the soughing of sands.
"Imagine a servant as divine as that...." Into a waiting boat.

The tiny bark bestrode the wind. Her visitor's words washed over Mya,
blue-scented and faint.

"I only wish _I_ had her...."

"I only wish you did too," she said to no one in particular.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thoughts of Dikki carried her back into the house. Dikki. Her tiny,
scrubbed morsel! Her beloved, pink tyrant. Maybe Maun wouldn't be
there. Only she would be, of course.

Mya's son strode imperially across his crib, knee deep in a magnificent
flutter of chewed paper bits. His greeting to her shone.

"Mum-mum-mum-my. Mummum."

She went to him and untangled his legs. Warm arms opened and closed.

"My sweet punkins." One ear invited nibbling. "You had to wait so long.
Mommie's going to feed her baby right away."

"Nun-nuh." The pink sills of his lips formed words with great effort.
"Mauny feeded me. I fru."

Mya swung sharp on her resentment, body tightened.

"Maun! I didn't tell you to feed him. _I wanted_ to do it. I even
thought about...." She waited, remembering, as the silver beauty bowed.

"I obeyed your command, Oh, Earth One."

They regarded one another across a dark silence. Then Mya's body
slackened. "Thank you," she said as she went into her sleeping chamber.

And she sat for a long time staring into her empty hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

Andro showed no concern.

"I can't understand your attitude, Mya."

He had eaten his dinner quietly, staring down into the foams of
the cooking pit, sitting brittle and stiff, as befitted a man of
importance, a man of prestige and position. And Mya had waited for the
moment when his hand would move toward her body.

"Answer me."

"I don't know what it is, Andro. It's just a feeling I have about her."

"Please explain yourself."

"I don't want her here. I was happier before she came."

He withdrew his hand. "Oh, happy, happy ... who can say what makes
happiness and what doesn't? Most women would be delighted that their
husbands had been so honored, but you--?"

"I _am_ delighted," she insisted. "Please understand."

"What is there to understand?"

"That I'm also afraid."

"Of Maun?" He was surprised.

"Of Maun ... or myself ... or my thoughts.... It's all the same thing."

"What nonsense is this, now?"

She peered through labyrinths of words for just the right ones. "I'm
human, Andro. I can't control all my thoughts. My actions, yes. But
thoughts come even when I don't call them. They can't be wrapped in
tissue paper and tucked into a drawer."

"Oh?"

"Don't you see? Ask any psychiatrist. There is a stimulus, a reaction,
an emotion, a thought. I can't do a thing about it."

"I fail to see what bearing this has."

"It has a lot. Things happen." She looked at the distant
bubble-dwellings. In them were the silver-eyed families.

"What sort of things?"

"Well, just a while back, when the Superior was here...." After the
words were there, out in the open, for him to stiffen against, she
realized her error.

"The Superior was here?" He was immediately alerted. "When? You didn't
mention it."

"Three sleep periods ago."

"And?" Eyeslits watched her carefully.

She opened her hands toward him. "I was hot and tired, and I happened
to think I would like it if he left."

"And Maun forced him...?"

She nodded.

His face collapsed and reassembled into something blackened and hard.

"Please don't get angry, Andro. Please don't!"

"How can you expect otherwise?" he shouted. "Stupid, silly woman that
you are! You dare to jeopardize my position with your petty whims of
who-stays-and-for-how-long!"

       *       *       *       *       *

His fury clouded the room. "Only you could do it! Only Mya, wife of
Andro!"

"But I've got to have some rest," she pleaded. "I've got to be able to
think freely once in a while."

"Think freely, she says!" He stopped before her and fairly screamed
into her face. "Doesn't Maun draw her energy from the sun? Doesn't
she fall into a comatose sleep as soon as we go night-side? Isn't she
almost dead just before daybreak? Can't you save your sniveling, puny
pranks until then?"

"Please, Andro, please! You don't know what that means!"

"You'll tell me!" His face could not help itself.

"To think, to feel only in the night! Must I save everything--my loves,
my fears, my angers--until just before daybreak?"

"Stop it!" he shrieked.

"Don't take my whole life and push it together and squeeze it into just
the little time before the sun rises! Don't shove me into the dark like
a sightless mole!"

Seizing her by the wrists, he drew her to her feet. With her arms
bound, white and aching, to his chest, he spoke into her face. Slowly.
Softly. To a not-quite-bright child.

"This ends here, Mya. I am the representative of the Third Planet. The
people of Venus have seen fit to single me out and make a present to
my wife. My wife will not affront them! She will not discredit me by
returning this gift. She will, instead, adapt herself. It is a simple
thing." The house waited.

"Do you understand?"

They stared bitterly at one another.

"Do you understand?"

"I understand." Her voice was hollow.

He released her, and she sank back, her head bent over the numbed husks
of her fingers. Andro stood watching the nape of her neck. He reached
down abruptly and stroked a twist of hair.

"Mya," he said softly, caressing her, "you will do as I ask."

"I will do as you ask."

The Great Liaison Officer breathed deeply. "Well now--that's better."
His fingers probed the hollows of her throat.

"Andro?" She slowed him.

"Yes?"

"Do you imagine they know us this well?"

"Who?"

"The Elders. Do you imagine they knew we can hurt ourselves, maybe
destroy ourselves, through a--a creature like her?"

He turned, his mind on other things, and undid his tunic.

"Mya, I am going to bed. You will follow."

"Right away." She crossed the room and picked up a globe from his
work table, the miniature of a blue-green planet with wide seas and
open plains. She held the full, wet summers, the clean, needle cities
carefully in her hands.

As he reached the portal, Andro paused before its flow and surge.

"Oh, by the way, there is a dead bird on the wharf. I wish you'd have
Maun bury it."

The globe dropped in glistening fragments at her feet. She was seeing a
bird. A little, singing, gold-plated bird, whose shrill happiness had
magnified the depths of her despair. And hating its happiness, she had
thought she could kill it.

Mya knew the color of the bird that Maun would bury in the morning.

       *       *       *       *       *

They sat, the three of them, saying no word, giving no sign. Like
actors, Mya thought. Like actors, not acting. Just stopped--waiting on
a dead stage for their cues. And when the line was said, when the words
she was waiting for had been uttered, would she know what to do?

She was uneasy. Maun tended the water bushes, sharp against the sullen
threat of clouds.

Dikki, boy botanist, balanced himself on his round bottom, and explored
the wonders of a light-flower. One finger probed into its blue-grey
flesh. The flower released a stream of scent.

"Nuh!" he said, and backed up precipitously. It had spit. Right at
him. He teetered to his feet and retreated, riding his fat legs with
confidence. They propelled him unsteadily, like reluctant pistons,
toward the wharf.

Mya watched his progress with a tired half smile.

Then it wasn't even a half smile.

"Dikki!" she cried, "come back." Her body tensed to watch his flight.
"_Dikki!_" The gap between boy and ledge grew smaller and smaller.

Suddenly, she was on her feet and running hard. "Come back!" she called
to him. "Watch out, Dikki, watch out!"

She grabbed him a whisper from the edge, and they slid, rolling on one
another to the brink. She looked into the sweet-smelling death of the
lagoon. Frightened eyes, flung hard on its waters, looked back.

"Oh, Dikki!" she moaned. "_Oh Dikki, oh, Dikki, oh Dikki!_"

He moved in to her, pinpointed between laughter and tears. When she
squeezed him, it tickled, and his face went kinky with smiles.

"Why you little imp!" She pulled him to safer sands. "What is the
matter with you, running like that?" Quick, slight slaps dusting his
bunting. "You can hurt yourself that way. Don't ever _do_ that
again."

Head thrown back, he offered her his delight.

"You naughty boy! Don't you grin at me that way. I ought to shake you
till your head wobbles."

He ran in puppy circles, dragging at her fingers, bubbling to himself.

And then, from nowhere, Maun appeared in a shower of sparks. She went
directly to the boy and knelt before him. She laid gentle hold of his
shoulders. The palms turned inward--gently, easily--seeking the line of
his throat. Long fingers laced together to form a band.

And she shook him. Great jerks set his head wobbling. Jolts ripped
against the position of his body. He contorted into jagged spasms of
limb and sound. An arm, a cry, his eyes ... Mya could no longer put him
together.

She flung herself upon Maun with animal ferocity. Her fists struck out
blindly from a time when love and violence had to be the same. She
struck and struck again. She bit, but her teeth found no yielding in
the flesh. She scratched, but her nails slid unnoticed from the metal.
Her cries might have been the buzz of an insect.

The silver sheen became red--wet red. It came from Mya.

In final panic, she clutched her mangled hands together, half prayer,
half weapon. As if she held a scythe, she cut back and forth across
Maun's body, to and fro. Across the head and back ... the face, and
back ... the shoulders, and back.... Furious, measured, desperate,
useless, useless....

And as to each thing there is a season, so Maun released the boy in her
own time. She stood motionless. Down the measure of hated body, Mya
wasted herself, till at last there was nothing left to do. But to sob
and beat a little upon the earth.

The statue stood stolidly above her.

"I obeyed your command, Oh, Earth One," she said, while the summer
noises sang.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pacing the late afternoon, Mya fled from fear. Thoughts touched her
mind in spinning flight. Think, think, she told herself. She tried to
reason, but the look of Dikki's face, the sound of his cry, hooded her
effort. It would do no good. No good at all this way.

She ran to her dressing nook. Dikki slept soundly, safely, with his
treasures stuffed under his stomach.

Something had to be done. But what, what, what? It was a wall. Andro
would not be back--and even if he were...? _No!_ There was no one
to turn to.

A face in the reflection bowl stopped her. "Look at me!" she thought.
"I can't keep my mind together any longer." It was falling off bit by
bit, and Maun was gathering all the pieces.

She bent to meet the reflection. Her eyes were large and hulled. "What
must I do?" she asked the eyes.

The lips mimicked her own. The image seemed to silver. Another face,
exactly like her own, looked back at her. She turned quickly, as if
starting to run, but the room gave her no place to run to.

What if she should do it again? What if she should someday become angry
enough to loose Maun, and--Her mind recoiled. It had to stop, end. She
had to be rid of Maun somehow.

"I'll destroy her," she thought.

She had moved to Dikki's crib before the lightening speared out and
held her. Her face blanched.

"I've done it! Dear God in Heaven! I've sent out a murder wave."

She groped her way to the bed and sank down, her head in her hands.
Behind closed lids, she waited. Time waited with her. There was nothing
more. Just emptiness and space.

Then the wind-clock stirred and exhaled. "It's almost night," she
thought.

What did it matter? Day or night?

No, stop! She raised her head and looked at something far off. "Almost
night!" she said aloud.

Thoughts began to arrange themselves in a pattern she could almost see.

Think. Try. Slowly now.

Maun's energy was lessening already. As the sun went down, she would
become weaker. Within one more rest period, she would be dormant. From
then on, her sleep deepened with each passing hour. By daybreak she
would be almost dead. It wasn't so hard now. The pieces were fitting
together.

If the command could be timed for next week, or next month, why not for
just before daybreak? When Maun, in her stupor, would be completely
unable to carry it out? And when Mya would be free to do what she had
to do?

She almost cried out. That was it. That was it. So simple, and yet so
perfect. She couldn't understand why she hadn't thought of it before.

Mya shut her eyes against the world, and made the thought loud and
clear. She gave it to Maun along the pathways of their minds. "I shall
destroy her just before the sun rises."

She pushed it, thrust it, drove it down dark corridors to the brain
that waited to receive it. "I shall destroy her _just before the sun
rises_."

And turning on her face, she gave up to exhaustion.

       *       *       *       *       *

She swam upward through a sea of sleep. Abruptly, thoughts split the
surface of her mind, and she sat upright.

She looked around the room. Something was missing. Something had been
forgotten, but there was no shape to the feeling of loss that plagued
her.

The curtains danced in the breeze. The room breathed quietly. It looked
secure and whole. She listened for the breathing of Dikki's slumber.
Glancing toward the nook, she could see the line of his cheek. His
sleep was flushed and happy.

But something was lost. Something was wrong. A check of the room
revealed nothing. She moved about, touching small objects, feeling
their safeness.

It was then she heard the footsteps, and she turned to meet them. The
portal mists waxed silver as Maun stood before her. Mya looked from the
other's face to the container of dissolving fluid that she held in her
hand. "I shall obey your command, Oh, Earth One."

There was a moment of vertigo--the instant of sway just before a giant
tree falls. During that instant, Mya thought a thousand thoughts,
searched through a thousand cubbyholes toward uttered phrases.

Where was the mistake? Where?

This was impossible. Maun couldn't be doing this. The room was still
light ... the sun hadn't set....

"_The sun!_" she said, and the lost was found.

Maun had never seen the sun! No one on this planet had ever seen it.
Maun didn't even know what it was!

Somewhere a sound started, low and bubbling....

The only "sun" she knew was not the one that gave her her life. It was
the boy asleep in the next room. Her own son, Mya's son! The sound grew
big and round and fat....

So change the words, and say the sentence, as Maun must say it, to see
what it looked like now. "I shall destroy _her_ just before the
son rises...."

And the sound stretched high, high, high, to the sky....

Mya leaned in on it, and tasted it, and knew it to be her own laughter.

Pretty soon the laughter stopped.

But the curtains kept right on dancing....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Andro, First Liaison Officer of the Third Planet, floated back to
the city with his wife's "present" beside him. His boat, pulled by an
underwater sunburst of luminous fish, befitted a man of importance, a
man of prestige and position. He glided to the milk-glass city where
the sleep cocoons filled and closed in on themselves, where the taper
trees flared, where the old dreamed of being younger, and the young
dreamed of being older. He drifted to a castle, on a ridge, on a hill,
where he was met by the elders with their shuttered faces. And they
looked at the "present," who swayed weakly behind him, and smiled._

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SIBLING ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
